Captain William Edward Rawlins Eyton-Jones, OBE (1894-1984), often shortened to 'Pop' Jones, was a Merchant Navy Captain and Master Mariner who served in various theatres during World War I and World War II, most notably in the Battle of the Atlantic.


== Early life ==
Eyton-Jones was born on 11 November 1894 in Ash, Kent, England, is a member of the Eyton-Jones family, and a nephew of Dr John Eyton-Jones.


== Career ==
During the early 1900s, Eyton-Jones trained as a junior naval officer with the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company before joining Ben Line Steamers as a Second Officer in March 1915 at the age of 31. He spent the next few years working for Ben Line and is recorded docking at Ellis Island, New York in 1917, while serving aboard the Bencleuch (part of the Ben Line fleet) as Second Officer. On 26 November 1926, Eyton-Jones was promoted to Captain, becoming Master of the Benlawers.
Eyton-Jones remained a Captain for Ben Line until his retirement in 1969 by which time he had become the Senior Master and Commodore of the Ben Line fleet.


== World War II ==
Eyton-Jones was Master of the Benvrackie when, on 13 May 1941, after dispersing from Convoy OB.312, she was torpedoed by the German submarine U-105, 630 miles South West of Freetown, Sierra Leone in the Atlantic Ocean halfway between Brazil and North Africa. U-105, of the German Kriegsmarine, commanded by George Schewe, fired two torpedoes which hit the ship in holds No. 4 and No. 5 sinking it in just over two minutes.At the time, the Benvrackie was carrying 25 survivors from the Lassell which had been torpedoed by U-107 on 30 April, picked up on 3 May.
Eyton-Jones went down with the ship but later came to the surface and helped survivors to some wreckage. They managed to reach the only lifeboat to get away. Thirteen crew of the Benvrackie and fifteen survivors from the Lassell were lost. He took charge and rescued other survivors from the sea until there were 59 survivors on board. The lifeboat was only designed to carry 38 passengers. They spent 13 days at sea in the open lifeboat and sailed over 500 miles before being rescued on 26 May 1942 by the British hospital ship HMHS Oxfordshire and landed at Freetown.As Master of the Benledi in 1942 he saw further action when on 5 April dive bombers of the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service tried to sink the ship while she lay in harbour in Columbo, British Ceylon. First, a number of dive bombers came over as the Benledi's guns opened fire on one of them. Then came a high level attack by several formations of seven planes each. The third formation came straight for the Benledi dropping seven bombs at the ship. The first fell just outside the boom, the second hit and wrecked a nearby navy destroyer, the third struck the vessels poop, and the fourth hit the quay side. The ship was on fire and Eyton-Jones, knowing that the magazine, which was situated in the poop, contained enough explosives to blow the whole stern away, and that under the poop were 70 tones of 250 pound incendiary bombs, ordered "Clear ship - everyone ashore". The crew managed to fight the fires and within 30 minutes the fire was under control. Prior to this incident the Benledi had on a number of occasions come under attack from other Japanese aircraft as well as from the German Luftwaffe.During 1943 he was seconded to North America for 9 months acting as planning and liaison officer for Ben Line and other shipping companies.
In 1973, he was interviewed as part of the Thames Television documentary, The World at War, where he recalled his involvement in the Battle of the Atlantic.


== Honours and awards ==
Eyton-Jones received a number of honours and awards for his service during World War I and World War II. The most notable were the OBE, which he received from King George VI at Buckingham Palace on 3 February 1942, and the Lloyd’s Medal for Bravery at Sea.


== References ==